Cadmium (Cd) is a toxic metal that leads to serious threat to food production and the atmosphere. In this study, sixteen rice lines were screened for Cd endurance at seedling stage using a prompt hydroponic technique. Among the lines conducted for screening, one was found tolerant; one was categorized as moderately tolerant and thirteen as susceptible. Results revealed that tolerant line had less damage in root and shoot improvement along with chlorophyll (a and b) synthesis and chlorophyll florescence characteristics at sprout stage thus providing an indication about Cd tolerance potential of a genotype. Further, comparative studies in these rice cultivars under hydroponic environments showed that Cd sensitivity in rice is primarily related to a decrease in root and shoot components. My findings reveal Sonarbangla as Cd tolerant variety that may boost up the production of rice in Cd-contaminated area and development of Cd tolerant rice trough breeding and transgenic approaches. High Cd accessibility exhibited no significant decrease in growth, chlorophyll synthesis, photosynthesis performance, soluble protein, plasma membrane stability in Cd-tolerant Sonarbangla, while these were rigorously affected in Cd-sensitive BRRI 72. Analysis of atomic absorption spectroscopy revealed that Sonarbangla only showed a substantial increase of Cd in roots; conversely, BRRI 72 cultivar exhibited a significant upsurge of Cd and also Fe, both in root and shoot. It recommends that additional Cd in Sonarbangla perhaps retained in roots via vacuolar sequestration without interfering cell activity. Moreover this was established by the enlarged accumulation of glutathione, cysteine, and phytochelatin along with OsHMA3 and OsPCS1 expression, feasibly expedited by nitric oxide in roots of Sonarbangla. Further BRRI 72 cultivar showed a noteworthy increase in Fe(III) chelate reductase activity and expression of Fe-associated genes (OsFRO1, OsIRT1, OsNRAMP1, and OsYSL15) under Cd stress, even though these were unchanged in Sonarbangla. Result suggesting that regulation of Fe uptake and transport plays an integral part in Cd-tolerance. Moreover, CAT, GR, APX, NO induction in root along with shoot sugar supports rice seedlings to endure Cd-induced oxidative damage. Among the S-metabolites glutathione, methionine, cysteine and N-metabolites (proline, lysine, histidine and glutamic acid) significantly increased only in Sonarbangla due to Cd stress. Finally, no noteworthy increase of H2O2 and Fe(III) chelate reductase activity were found in reciprocal grafted plant having Sonarbangla rootstock with either BRRI 72 or Sonarbangla scion. It indicates that Sonarbangla roots may carry signal to govern the responses associated with Cd tolerance. PCR-RAPD diagnostic also confirm the varietal differences used in reciprocally grafted plants. These findings provide indispensable background for Cd detoxification and Cd-free rice production for environment and health safety.



# Revised Version

Cadmium (Cd) has metal toxicity that leads to serious threat to food production and the atmosphere.In this study, sixteen rice lines were screened for Cd endurance at seedling stage using a prompt hydroponic technique. Among the lines conducted for screening one named Sonarbangla was found tolerant had less damage in root and shoot improvement along with chlorophyll (a and b) synthesis and chlorophyll florescence characteristics at sprout stage thus providing an indication about Cd tolerance potential of a genotype. another was categorized as moderately tolerant and rest thirteen as susceptible. High Cd accessibility exhibited no significant decrease in growth, chlorophyll synthesis, photosynthesis performance, soluble protein, plasma membrane stability in Sonarbangla, while these were rigorously affected in Cd-sensitive BRRI 72 which revealed Sonarbangla as Cd tolerant variety that may boost up the production of rice in Cd-contaminated area and development of Cd tolerant rice trough breeding and transgenic approaches .